docs: SEO improvements (#11962)
hashicorp/consul: website/content/docs/intro/usecases/what-is-a-service-mesh.mdx

---
layout: docs
page_title: What is service mesh??
description: >-

>   Learn what a serive mesh is, it's benefits, and how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Learn what a service mesh is, it's benefits, and how it works.
```

---

# What is a Service Mesh?

A _service mesh_ is a dedicated network layer that provides secure service-to-service communication for on-prem, cloud, or multi-cloud infrastructure.
Service meshes are often used with a microservice architectural pattern, but can provide value in any scenario where complex networking is involved.

## Benefits of a Service Mesh

> A _service mesh_ provides benefits for all organziations, ranging from security to improved application resiliency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A service mesh provides benefits for all organizations, ranging from security to improved application resiliency.
```
Is there a reason that service mesh is italicized throughout the entire document?

Author: We normally use italic for words that standout, such as service names. After reviewing the style guide, we only need to use italic in the [first usage of the term](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MRvGd6tS5JkIwl_GssbyExkMJqOXKeUE00kSEtFi8m8/edit#heading=h.lhe5v722498w).

Some of the benefits of a _service mesh_ include;

- service discovery
- application health monitoring
- load balancing
- automatic failover
- traffic management
- encryption

> - observability and tracability,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- observability and traceability,
```

- authentication and authorization,
- network automation

> A common usecase for leveraging a _service mesh_ is to achieve a [_zero trust_ model](/use-cases/zero-trust-networking).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common use case for leveraging a _service mesh_ is to achieve a [_zero trust_ model](/use-cases/zero-trust-networking).
```

![Overview of a service mesh](/img/what_is_service_mesh_1.png)

## API Gateway vs Service Mesh

An API gateway is a centralized access point for handling incoming client requests and delivering them to services.
The API Gateway acts as a control plane that allows operators and developers to manage incoming client requests and apply different handling logic depending on the request.
The API Gateway will route the incoming requests to the respective service. API Gateways primary function is to handle requests and return the reply from the service back to the client.

A _service mesh_ specializes in the network management of services and the communication between services.
The mesh is responsible for keeping track of services and their health status, IP address, traffic routing, and ensuring all the traffic between services are authenticated and encrypted.
Unlike API Gateways, a _service mesh_ will track all registered services' lifecycle and ensure requests are routed to healthy instances of the service.

> API Gateways are frequently deployed alongside a loadbalancer to ensure traffic is directed to healthy and available instances of the service.
> The mesh reduces the loadbalancer footprint as routing responsibilities are handled in a decentralized manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API Gateways are frequently deployed alongside a load balancer to ensure traffic is directed to healthy and available instances of the service.
The mesh reduces the load balancer footprint as routing responsibilities are handled in a decentralized manner.
```

> API Gateways can be used togehter with a _service mesh_ to bridge external networks (non-mesh) with a _service mesh_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
API Gateways can be used together with a _service mesh_ to bridge external networks (non-mesh) with a _service mesh_.
```

> -> **Note**: API Gateways are frequently used to accept north-south based traffic. North-south traffic is networking traffic that either enters or exits a datacenter or a virutal private network (VPC).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-> **Note**: API Gateways are frequently used to accept north-south based traffic. North-south traffic is networking traffic that either enters or exits a data center or a virtual private network (VPC).
```

> A _service mesh_ is primarly used for handling east-west based traffic. East-west traffic traditionaly remains inside a datacenter or a VPC.
> A _service mesh_ can be connected to another _service mesh_ in another datacenter or VPC to form a federated mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A _service mesh_ is primarily used for handling east-west based traffic. East-west traffic traditionally remains inside a data center or a VPC.
A _service mesh_ can be connected to another _service mesh_ in another data center or VPC to form a federated mesh.
```

This dynamic infrastructure has a short life cycle, meaning virtual machines (VM) and containers are frequently recycled.
It's difficult for an organization to manage and keep track of application services that live on short-lived resources. A _service mesh_ solves this problem by acting as a central registry of all registered services.
As service instances, either VMs or containers, come up and down, the mesh is aware of their state and availability. The ability to conduct _service discovery_ is the foundation to the other problems a _service mesh_ solves.

As a service mesh is aware of the state of a service and its instances, the mesh can implement more intelligent and dynamic network routing.
Many service meshes offer L7 traffic management capabilities. As a result, operators and developers can create powerful rules to direct network traffic as needed, such as load balancing, traffic splitting, dynamic failover, and custom resolvers.
A service mesh's dynamic network behavior allows application owners to improve application resiliency and availability with no application changes.

> Implementing dynamic network behavior is critical as more and more applications are deployed across different cloud providers (multi-cloud) and private datacenters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing dynamic network behavior is critical as more and more applications are deployed across different cloud providers (multi-cloud) and private data centers.
```

Traditionally, services are permitted to communicate with other services through firewall rules.
The traditional firewall (IP-based) model is difficult to enforce with dynamic infrastructure resources with a short lifecycle and frequently recycling IP addresses.
As a result, network administrators have to open up network ranges to permit network traffic between services without differentiating the services generating the network traffic. However, a _service mesh_ allows operators and developers to shift away from an IP-based model and focus more on service to service permissions.
An operator defines a policy that only allows _service A_ to communicate with _service B_. Otherwise, the default action is to deny the traffic.
This shift from an IP address-based security model to a service-focused model reduces the overhead of securing network traffic and allows an organization to take advantage of multi-cloud environments without sacrificing security due to complexity.

## How Do You Implement a Service Mesh?

Service meshes are commonly installed in Kubernetes clusters. There are also platform-agnostic service meshes available for non-Kubernetes-based workloads.

> For Kubernetes, most service mesh can be installed by operators through a [Helm chart](https://artifacthub.io/). Additionally, the service mesh may offer a CLI tool that supports the installation and maintenance of the service mesh.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Kubernetes, most service mesh can be installed by operators through a [Helm chart](https://helm.sh/). Additionally, the service mesh may offer a CLI tool that supports the installation and maintenance of the service mesh.
```
It might be better to link to the Helm website so that the reader can better understand what Helm is before exploring a chart registry like ArtifactHub.

---
layout: docs
page_title: What is a service mesh?
description: >-
  Learn what a service mesh is, it's benefits, and how it works. 

>   A service mesh can solve many of the modern challenges that exist in multi-platform and multi-cloud application architectures, ranging from security to application resiliency.

Author: Exactly, yup :)

---

# What is a Service Mesh?

> A _service mesh_ is a dedicated network layer that provides secure service-to-service communication for on-prem, cloud, or multi-cloud infrastructure.

Author: I like it!

> Service meshes are often used with a microservice architectural pattern, but can provide value in any scenario where complex networking is involved.

Reviewer 2: @jkirschner-hashicorp This would be another question or headline. It would generate more traffic from those searching for "microservices architecture patterns." If this isn't too much feel free to include this.

## Benefits of a Service Mesh

A service mesh provides benefits for all organizations, ranging from security to improved application resiliency.
Some of the benefits of a service mesh include;

> - service discovery

Reviewer 2: Some of these it would make sense to link out to other pages, but at the same time we don't want to overwhelm a reader with links.

- application health monitoring
- load balancing
- automatic failover
- traffic management
- encryption
- observability and traceability,
- authentication and authorization,
- network automation

A common use case for leveraging a service mesh is to achieve a [_zero trust_ model](/use-cases/zero-trust-networking).

> In a _zero trust_ model, applications require identity-based access to ensure all communication within the service mesh is authenticated with TLS certificates and encrypted in transit.

Author: Good point. I added the following text. 

In traditional security strategies, protection is primarily focused at the perimeter of a network. 
In cloud environments, the surface area for network access is much wider than the traditional on-premises networks. 
In addition, traditional security practices overlook the fact that many bad actors can originate from within the network walls. 
A zero trust model addresses these concerns while allowing organizations to scale as needed.

## How does a Service Mesh work?

A service mesh typically consist of a control plane, and a data plane. The control plane maintains a central registry that keeps track of all services and their respective IP addresses, this is called [service discovery](https://www.hashicorp.com/products/consul/service-discovery-and-health-checking).
As long as the application is registered with the control plane, the control plane will be able to share with other members of the mesh how to communicate with the application and enforce rules for who can communicate with each other.

The control plane is responsible for securing the mesh, facilitating service discovery, health checking, policy enforcement, and other similar operational concerns.

The data plane handles communication between services.

> Many service mesh solutions employ a sidecar proxy to handle data plane communications, and thus limit the level of awareness the services need to have about the network environment.

Author: @jon-kow I know you wanted a certain work count but are you comfortable with this suggestion? I like the suggestion a lot 🚀

![Overview of a service mesh](/img/what_is_service_mesh_1.png)

## API Gateway vs Service Mesh

An API gateway is a centralized access point for handling incoming client requests and delivering them to services.
The API Gateway acts as a control plane that allows operators and developers to manage incoming client requests and apply different handling logic depending on the request.
The API Gateway will route the incoming requests to the respective service. API Gateways primary function is to handle requests and return the reply from the service back to the client.

> A service mesh specializes in the network management of services and the communication between services.

Author: Yup, managing services gets a bit sticky as that is what an orchestrator does.

The mesh is responsible for keeping track of services and their health status, IP address, traffic routing, and ensuring all the traffic between services are authenticated and encrypted.
Unlike API Gateways, a service mesh will track all registered services' lifecycle and ensure requests are routed to healthy instances of the service.
API Gateways are frequently deployed alongside a load balancer to ensure traffic is directed to healthy and available instances of the service.
The mesh reduces the load balancer footprint as routing responsibilities are handled in a decentralized manner.

API Gateways can be used together with a service mesh to bridge external networks (non-mesh) with a service mesh.

-> **Note**: API Gateways are frequently used to accept north-south based traffic. North-south traffic is networking traffic that either enters or exits a data center or a virtual private network (VPC).
A service mesh is primarily used for handling east-west based traffic. East-west traffic traditionally remains inside a data center or a VPC.

> A service mesh can be connected to another service mesh in another data center or VPC to form a federated mesh.

Author: We can probably do without that statement, but I do want to keep the Note that explains north-south vs east-west.

> -> **Note**: API Gateways are frequently used to accept north-south based traffic. North-south traffic is networking traffic that either enters or exits a data center or a virtual private network (VPC).
> A service mesh is primarily used for handling east-west based traffic. East-west traffic traditionally remains inside a data center or a VPC.
> A service mesh can be connected to another service mesh in another data center or VPC to form a federated mesh.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
-> **API gateways and traffic direction**: API gateways are often used to accept north-south traffic. North-south traffic is networking traffic that either enters or exits a data center or a virtual private network (VPC).
A service mesh is primarily used for handling east-west traffic. East-west traffic traditionally remains inside a data center or a VPC.
A service mesh can be connected to another service mesh in another data center or VPC to form a federated mesh.
```
Trying to make a more meaningful label for the callout. I also removed "based" because in order to properly punctuate, you would need to write "north-south-based",  which is kind of weird.

> ## What Problems Does a Service Mesh Solve?

Author: I've answered this question more times than I can count. What helps people understand API Gateways and how Consul is different is the east-west/north-south explanation.  For that reason, I believe we have to keep that information here.

Fine-grained policies that dictate what services are allowed to communicate with each other is another benefit of a service mesh.
Traditionally, services are permitted to communicate with other services through firewall rules.
The traditional firewall (IP-based) model is difficult to enforce with dynamic infrastructure resources with a short lifecycle and frequently recycling IP addresses.
As a result, network administrators have to open up network ranges to permit network traffic between services without differentiating the services generating the network traffic. However, a service mesh allows operators and developers to shift away from an IP-based model and focus more on service to service permissions.
An operator defines a policy that only allows _service A_ to communicate with _service B_. Otherwise, the default action is to deny the traffic.
This shift from an IP address-based security model to a service-focused model reduces the overhead of securing network traffic and allows an organization to take advantage of multi-cloud environments without sacrificing security due to complexity.

## How Do You Implement a Service Mesh?

> Service meshes are commonly installed in Kubernetes clusters. There are also platform-agnostic service meshes available for non-Kubernetes-based workloads.

Author: What do you have in mind here @jkirschner-hashicorp? Because I thought I addressed it below.

For Kubernetes, most service mesh can be installed by operators through a [Helm chart](https://helm.sh/). Additionally, the service mesh may offer a CLI tool that supports the installation and maintenance of the service mesh.
Non-Kubernetes based service meshes can be installed through infrastructure as code (IaC) products such as [Terraform](https://www.terraform.io/), CloudFormation, ARM Templates, Puppet, Chef, etc.

> ## What is a Multi Platform Service Mesh?

Author: @jon-kow thoughts on this? Grammatically, it is a correct suggestion. I'm just not sure from an SEO perspective.

> ## What is a Multi Platform Service Mesh?

Reviewer 3: I believe that the proper grammar would be to use lowercase for "platform". Hyphenating words technically makes them one word (except for when used for phrasal adjectives), so only the first letter should be capped.

> A multi-platform service mesh is capable of supporting various infrastructure environments. This can range from having the service mesh support Kubernetes and non-Kubernetes workloads, to having a service mesh span across various cloud environments (multi-cloud).

Author: Adding hybrid cloud, good call.

## What is Consul?

> Consul is a multi-networking tool that offers a fully-featured service mesh solution that solves the networking and security challenges of operating microservices and cloud infrastructure.

Reviewer 4: What is "multi-networking"? Feels like an undefined buzzword.

Reviewer 4: I feel like we're missing something about heterogenous environments in here (e.g., multi-cloud, hybrid-cloud ... whatever combo you have)

Author: @jkirschner-hashicorp  the term "multi-networking" is something Neena has been wanting us to use. I would check with her, but you're right. I don't think there is a clear definition of the term. 

I'm adding multi-cloud, hybrid-cloud

Consul offers a software-driven approach to routing and segmentation. It also brings additional benefits such as failure handling, retries, and network observability.

> Each of these features can be used individually as needed or they can be used together to build a full service mesh and achieve [zero trust](https://www.hashicorp.com/solutions/zero-trust-security) security. In simple terms, Consul is the control plane of the service mesh.

Reviewer 4: I don't know that it's obvious to the reader that Consul doesn't leave it as an exercise to the reader to figure out how to use a data plane with it. We integrate closely with a commonly-used, open source service mesh data plane: Envoy.

Author: @jkirschner-hashicorp Good call Jared. How does this sound. I added it after the last sentence.

The data plane is supported by Consul through its first class support of [Envoy](https://www.envoyproxy.io/) as a proxy.

> You can use Consul with virtual machines (VMs), containers, or with container orchestration platforms, such as [Nomad](https://www.nomadproject.io/) and Kubernetes.

Reviewer 4: Should we include ECS/serverless and bare metal?

Reviewer 4: Also, thanks for including Nomad :)

Author: I don't feel comfortable stating serverless because that is not a first class citizen usecase. ECS, I view as a container orchestration platform.
